
The Prevalence Negative and Fear-Inducing Words in the Tweets of Republicans and Democrats in 114th Congress

What: Do Republican or Democratic members of Congress use more negative and threatening words in their Twitter accounts? How does the distribution of such negative words vary by state and hence by the party with which the majority of constituents identifies? What association (if any) is there between negative word usage and an ideological spectrum based on campaign contributions? This project seeks to explore the correlational relationships between negative word use in the public sphere, for which a text analysis of Twitter accounts will serve as a proxy, and other features of congressional members and their constituents.

Why: Political psychology experiments reveal that individuals who self-identify as conservative are more sensitive to threats, fearful stimuli, and negative words or pictures, relative to self-identified liberals. Yet it is not clear how these cognitive and attitudinal differences affect the political behavior or political expression of candidates in equilibrium. Did Independent or Democratic members elected from a right-leaning state use more threatening language in the years leading up to their election? How do party affiliation, placement on an ideological spectrum, and negative word use relate to each other? 

How: This project will involve scraping the Twitter accounts of members of the 114th Congress from January 2010 to December 2012 and matching members with party affiliation and state information, as scraped from Congress.gov. Then, I will analyze the text to reveal the prevalence of (1) negative and (2) fear-inducing or threatening words. I will use data from the Database on Ideology, Money in Politics, and Elections (DIME) to determine where on the liberal-conservative spectrum each member falls. Finally, I will use Python to analyze relationships between negative word usage, state (and its distribution of political affiliations), location on the ideological spectrum, term number, and (potentially) campaign contributions. 

There are many, many limitations to this study, but the results can offer some suggestive evidence about the dynamics between constituent biases and the political expression of politicians. 